---
title: 'Dassie: a database of subject terms and hierarchies in the Library of Congress Subject Headings'
tags:
- ontologies
- library of congress subject headings
- text processing
- database
authors:
- name: Michael Hucka
  orcid: 0000-0001-9105-5960
  affiliation: 1
affiliations:
- name: Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
  index: 1
date: 9 February 2018
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Dassie was developed to solve a simple need: to provide a fast way to search and browse the terms in the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) [@lcsh].  We converted a portion of the LCSH linked data graph into a database that makes explicit the "is-a" relationships between LCSH terms.  The result, Dassie (a loose acronym for _"**da**tabase of **s**ubject term**s** and hierarch**ie**s"_), allows programs to use normal MongoDB network API calls to search for LCSH terms and their relationships.

Dassie comes with a setup/control program (written in Bash) and a command-line query program (written in Python).  The Dassie database server can run on a users' desktop computer or a networked computer.  The command-line program is convenient for doing simple look-ups and also serves as an example of how to write a Python client program that accesses the database over the network.  (The same could be implemented using any of the different MongoDB drivers available for other programming languages).  The following is an example of using the `dassie` command-line program to show the paths from the term `sh2008002926` to the top-most terms:

```csh
# dassie -t sh2008002926
======================================================================
sh85118553: Science
└─ sh85076841: Life sciences
   └─ sh85014203: Biology
      └─ sh2003008355: Computational biology
         └─ sh2008002926: Systems biology

sh00007934: Science
└─ sh85076841: Life sciences
   └─ sh85014203: Biology
      └─ sh2003008355: Computational biology
         └─ sh2008002926: Systems biology
======================================================================
```

# Database structure

Dassie's database contents were generated by beginning with the RDF file for the LCSH linked data [@lcsh-download], processing the RDF triples to extract the `broader` and `narrower` relationships between terms while simultaneously skipping all the children's subject identifiers (terms whose names begin with `sj`), computing some additional properties, and finally storing everything in a MongoDB database.  Each entry in the database is indexed by its LCSH identifier (for example, `sh89003287`) and has a structure of the following form, where the field values are always either a string, a list of strings, an empty list, or the value `None`:

```javascript
{
  "_id": "string",
  "label": "string",
  "alt_labels": [ "string", "string", ...],
  "note": "string",
  "broader": [ "id", "id", ...],
  "narrower": [ "id", "id", ...],
  "topmost": [ "id", "id", ...]
}
```

The meanings of the fields are as follows:

| Field        | Description | SKOS RDF component |
|--------------|-------------|-------------------|
| `_id`        | The term identifier | URI of the term |
| `label`      | The preferred descriptive label for the term | `core#prefLabel` |
| `alt_labels` | One or more alternative descriptive labels | `core#altLabel` |
| `note`       | Notes (from LCSH) about the term | `core#note` |
| `broader`    | List of hypernyms of the term | `core#broader` |
| `narrower`   | List of hyponyms of the term | `core#narrower` |
| `topmost`    | List of topmost hyponyms of the term | (computed) |

Most of the fields in a Dassie entry are taken directly from the LCSH database, except for the field `topmost`.  That field is computed by following hypernyms from a given entry until terms are reached that have no values for `broader`.  The `topmost` field holds a list of the unique topmost hypernyms computing this way.  (Note that there may be more than one path from a given term to a topmost term, and thus for a given number of topmost terms N, running `dassie -t` may show more than N paths.)

# Security

To mitigate security risks that would arise from having unrestricted network access to the database, Dassie requires the use of a user name and password.  These are set at the time of first creating installing and configuring Dassie database using the `dassie-server` control/configuration program.  For its part, the `dassie` command-line utility uses the operating system's keyring/keychain functionality to get the user name and password needed to access the database over the network, so that you do not have to type them every time.  If no such credentials are found, it will query the user interactively for the user name and password, and then store them in the keyring/keychain so that it does not have to ask again in the future.

# Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by the [National Science Foundation](https://nsf.gov) under Grant Number 1533792.  Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

# References
